README.md, before:

# rmemo (Reactive Memo)

rmemo is a tiny no-fluff state management library using reactive memos & reactive signals for the server & browser. This includes:

* reactive memos
* reactive signals
* autosubscriptions
* async support
* a terse & focused api
* performance
* integration with garbage collector via WeakRef

| imports                                                    | size  |
|------------------------------------------------------------|:-----:|
| memo_                                                      | 372 B |
| memo_ + sig_                                               | 391 B |
| memo_ + sig_ + be_ + ctx_                                  | 496 B |
| memo_ + sig_ + be_ + ctx_ + be_memo_pair_ + be_sig_triple_ | 589 B |

## installation

[//]: @formatter:off
```shell
npm i ctx-core
# or
npm i rmemo
```
[//]: @formatter:on

rmemo is part of the ctx-core package so installing the ctx-core package & using the `ctx-core/rmemo` export will enable usage of rmemo. There is also a standalone `rmemo` package which exports `ctx-core/rmemo`

## usage

[//]: @formatter:off
```ts
// users.ts
import { sig_ } from 'rmemo' // or 'ctx-core/rmemo'
export const user_a$ = sig_<User[]>([])
  .add(user_a$=>
    fetch('https://my.api/users')
      .then(res=>res.json())
      .then(user_a=>user_a$._ = user_a))
export function user__add(user:User) {
  user_a$._ = [...user_a$(), user]
}
export interface User {
  id:number
  name:string
}
```
[//]: @formatter:on

[//]: @formatter:off
```ts
// admins.ts
import { memo_ } from 'rmemo' // or 'ctx-core/rmemo'
import { user_a$ } from './users.js'
export const admin_a$ = memo_(()=>user_a$().filter(i=>i.isAdmin))
```
[//]: @formatter:on

## integration with relementjs

rmemo provides optional opt-in reactivity to [relementjs](https://github.com/relementjs/relementjs). Elements, Element attributes + Element props can be reactively rendered by passing in a `memo_` on `sig_` instance. 

## how is rmemo different?

rmemo is a small & focused library. It supports `memo_` (like nanostores `computed`, svelte `derived`, solidjs `createMemo`, & VanJS `derive`) & `sig_` (like nanostore `atom`, svelte `writable`, solidjs `createSignal`, & VanJS `state`).

|                                                       | **rmemo** |  **nanostores**  |    **solidjs**     |    **sveltejs**    | **vanjs** |
|-------------------------------------------------------|:---------:|:----------------:|:------------------:|:------------------:|:---------:|
| **small payload**                                     |     ✅     |        ✅         |         ✅          |         ✅          |     ✅     |
| **performant**                                        |     ✅     |        ✅         |         ✅          |         ✅          |     ✅     |
| **autosubscriptions**                                 |     ✅     |        ❌         |         ✅          |         ❌          |     ✅     |
| **server side reactivity**                            |     ✅     |        ✅         |         ✅          |         ✅          |     ❌     |
| **diamond dependencies**                              |     ✅     |        ✅         |         ✅          |         ✅          |     ❌     |
| **independent from component tree**                   |     ✅     |        ✅         |  ❌ (next version)  |         ✅          |     ✅     |
| **reactive async**                                    |     ✅     | ❌ (next version) |         ✅          |         ✅          |     ❌     |
| **terse api**                                         |     ✅     |        ❌         |         ❌          |         ❌          |     ✅     |
| **contexts**                                          |     ✅     | ❌ (next version) | ✅ (component tree) | ✅ (component tree) |     ❌     |
| **Automatic Garbage Collection of derived reactives** |     ✅     | ❌  | ✅ | ❌ |     ✅     |

Since ctx-core is a general purpose context library, ctx-core's context functions (`be_` & `ctx__new`) are compatible with all of these libraries. ctx-core context functions are included in the rmemo package.

## advanced rmemos

`memosig_`: A memo signal or a settable memo. If a memosig is programatically set & the parent rmemo changes, the memosig value resets.

`lock_memosig_`: Also a memo signal or a settable memo. If the memosig is programatically set, the lock_memosig locks...meaning if the parent rmemo changes, the value remains locked. 

## context

Contexts are useful for managing state & disposing of state with Garbage Collection. The current context can be filled with state. When it's time to dispose of the state, one can use Garbage Collection as long as all active references to the `ctx` are removed.

rememo includes functions to support contexts using ctx-core. ctx-core uses [dependency injection](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dependency_injection). The `ctx` is typically passed as an argument into the function being called. If the front-end library supports `Context` components, as React, Sveltejs, Solidjs, & others do, the `ctx` can be assigned to the `Context` component.

### context example

The above example works on the browser side, since there is only one instance `user_a$` & `admin_a$` to render the UI. The server can handle multiple requests concurrency. Defining module level rmemos is not concurrency safe. Concurrent requests will result in data from one request spilling over into another request.

A `ctx` solves this issue by storing the rmemo instances in the `ctx`. Each request instantiates a `ctx` via `ctx_()`.

ctx-core usese the `be_` function to define a memoized function to set a "slot" in the `ctx`.

[//]: @formatter:off
```ts
// users.ts
import { be_, type ctx_T, sig_ } from 'rmemo'
export const user_a$_ = be_(()=>
  sig_<User[]>([])
    .add(user_a$=>
      fetch('https://an.api/users')
        .then(res=>res.json())
        .then(user_a=>user_a$._ = user_a)))
export function user__add(ctx:ctx_T, user:User) {
  user_a$_(ctx)([...user_a$_(ctx)(), user])
}
export interface User {
  id:number
  name:string
}
```
[//]: @formatter:on

[//]: @formatter:off
```ts
// admins.ts
import { be_, memo_ } from 'rmemo'
import { user_a$_ } from './users.js'
export const admin_a$_ = be_(ctx=>
  memo_(()=>
    user_a$_(ctx)()
      .filter(i=>i.isAdmin)))
```
[//]: @formatter:on

### context with helper functions example

Calling `user_a$_(ctx)()` & `admin_a$_(ctx)()` is a bit awkward. rmemo provides some helper functions.

[//]: @formatter:off
```ts
// users.ts
import { be_sig_triple_, type ctx_T } from 'rmemo'
export const [
  user_a$_,
  user_a_
  user_a__set,
] = be_sig_triple_<User[]>(
  ()=>[]
).add((ctx, user_a$)=>
  fetch('https://an.api/users')
    .then(res=>res.json())
    .then(user_a=>user_a$._ = user_a))
export function user__add(ctx:ctx_T, user:User) {
  user_a__set(ctx, [...user_a_(ctx), user])
}
export interface User {
  id:number
  name:string
}
```
[//]: @formatter:on

[//]: @formatter:off
```ts
// admins.ts
import { be_memo_pair_ } from 'rmemo'
import { type User, user_a_ } from './users.js'
// uses the function argument to instantiate a rmemo
export const [
  admin_a$_,
  admin_a_,
] = be_memo_pair_(ctx=>
  user_a_(ctx)
    .filter(i=>i.isAdmin))
```
[//]: @formatter:on

## Note about the Tag Vector Name Convention

You may have noticed that underscore casing is used & the trailing `_` for factory functions. This is from the development of the [Tag Vector](https://www.briantakita.me/posts/tag-vector-0-introduction) name convention.

## motivation

I'm a fan of reactive state management solutions provided by nanostores, solidjs, svelte, & vanJS. I wanted one of these solutions to be a general solution that I can use on the browser & server, with web UIs & domain libraries. Each of these projects are focused on their particular objectives. I found they were unable to support my use cases in one way or another.

Between an impasse in adding autosubscriptions to nanostores & adding server-side reactive support to vanJS, I created rmemo.

Commit message:

README: advanced rmemos:
	table format
	+ .add(cb)
	+ be_sig_triple
	+ id_be_sig_triple
	+ ns_id_be_sig_triple
	+ ns_be_sig_triple
	+ be_memo_pair
	+ id_be_memo_pair
	+ ns_id_be_memo_pair
	+ ns_be_memo_pair
	+ be_memosig_triple
	+ id_be_memosig_triple
	+ ns_id_be_memosig_triple
	+ ns_be_memosig_triple
	+ be_lock_memosig_triple
	+ id_be_lock_memosig_triple
	+ ns_id_be_lock_memosig_triple
	+ ns_be_lock_memosig_triple
	+ rmemo__off
	+ rmemo__on
	+ rmemo__unset

README.md, after:

# rmemo (Reactive Memo)

rmemo is a tiny no-fluff state management library using reactive memos & reactive signals for the server & browser. This includes:

* reactive memos
* reactive signals
* autosubscriptions
* async support
* a terse & focused api
* performance
* integration with garbage collector via WeakRef

| imports                                                    | size  |
|------------------------------------------------------------|:-----:|
| memo_                                                      | 372 B |
| memo_ + sig_                                               | 391 B |
| memo_ + sig_ + be_ + ctx_                                  | 496 B |
| memo_ + sig_ + be_ + ctx_ + be_memo_pair_ + be_sig_triple_ | 589 B |

## installation

[//]: @formatter:off
```shell
npm i ctx-core
# or
npm i rmemo
```
[//]: @formatter:on

rmemo is part of the ctx-core package so installing the ctx-core package & using the `ctx-core/rmemo` export will enable usage of rmemo. There is also a standalone `rmemo` package which exports `ctx-core/rmemo`

## usage

[//]: @formatter:off
```ts
// users.ts
import { sig_ } from 'rmemo' // or 'ctx-core/rmemo'
export const user_a$ = sig_<User[]>([])
  .add(user_a$=>
    fetch('https://my.api/users')
      .then(res=>res.json())
      .then(user_a=>user_a$._ = user_a))
export function user__add(user:User) {
  user_a$._ = [...user_a$(), user]
}
export interface User {
  id:number
  name:string
}
```
[//]: @formatter:on

[//]: @formatter:off
```ts
// admins.ts
import { memo_ } from 'rmemo' // or 'ctx-core/rmemo'
import { user_a$ } from './users.js'
export const admin_a$ = memo_(()=>user_a$().filter(i=>i.isAdmin))
```
[//]: @formatter:on

## integration with relementjs

rmemo provides optional opt-in reactivity to [relementjs](https://github.com/relementjs/relementjs). Elements, Element attributes + Element props can be reactively rendered by passing in a `memo_` on `sig_` instance.

## how is rmemo different?

rmemo is a small & focused library. It supports `memo_` (like nanostores `computed`, svelte `derived`, solidjs `createMemo`, & VanJS `derive`) & `sig_` (like nanostore `atom`, svelte `writable`, solidjs `createSignal`, & VanJS `state`).

|                                                       | **rmemo** |  **nanostores**  |    **solidjs**     |    **sveltejs**    | **vanjs** |
|-------------------------------------------------------|:---------:|:----------------:|:------------------:|:------------------:|:---------:|
| **small payload**                                     |     ✅     |        ✅         |         ✅          |         ✅          |     ✅     |
| **performant**                                        |     ✅     |        ✅         |         ✅          |         ✅          |     ✅     |
| **autosubscriptions**                                 |     ✅     |        ❌         |         ✅          |         ❌          |     ✅     |
| **server side reactivity**                            |     ✅     |        ✅         |         ✅          |         ✅          |     ❌     |
| **diamond dependencies**                              |     ✅     |        ✅         |         ✅          |         ✅          |     ❌     |
| **independent from component tree**                   |     ✅     |        ✅         |  ❌ (next version)  |         ✅          |     ✅     |
| **reactive async**                                    |     ✅     | ❌ (next version) |         ✅          |         ✅          |     ❌     |
| **terse api**                                         |     ✅     |        ❌         |         ❌          |         ❌          |     ✅     |
| **contexts**                                          |     ✅     | ❌ (next version) | ✅ (component tree) | ✅ (component tree) |     ❌     |
| **Automatic Garbage Collection of derived reactives** |     ✅     | ❌  | ✅ | ❌ |     ✅     |

Since ctx-core is a general purpose context library, ctx-core's context functions (`be_` & `ctx__new`) are compatible with all of these libraries. ctx-core context functions are included in the rmemo package.

## advanced rmemos

| function                        | description                                                                                                                                                           |
|---------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `.add(cb)`                      | Call the given cb when the rmemo is loaded by being called. Can be used to call async functions. If a rmemo is returned, the rmemo will be activated.                 |
| `memosig_`                      | A memo signal or a settable memo. If a memosig is programatically set & the parent rmemo changes, the memosig value resets.                                           |
| `lock_memosig_`                 | Also a memo signal or a settable memo. If the memosig is programatically set, the lock_memosig locks...meaning if the parent rmemo changes, the value remains locked. |
| `be_sig_triple_`                | Returns an array of 3 context be_ functions. sig object getter, value getter, & value setter                                                                          |
| `id_be_sig_triple_`             | Same as `be_sig_triple_` + sets the id of the `be` function                                                                                                           |
| `ns_id_be_sig_triple_`          | Same as `be_sig_triple_` + sets the id of the `be` function & operates on the given ctx namespace.                                                                    |
| `ns_be_sig_triple_`             | Same as `be_sig_triple_` & operates on the given ctx namespace.                                                                                                       |
| `be_memo_pair_`                 | Returns an array of 2 context be_ functions. memo object getter & value getter.                                                                                       |
| `id_be_memo_pair_`              | Same as `be_memo_pair_` + sets the id of the `be` function                                                                                                            |
| `ns_id_be_memo_pair_`           | Same as `be_memo_pair_` + sets the id of the `be` function & operates on the given ctx namespace.                                                                     |
| `ns_be_memo_pair_`              | Same as `be_memo_pair_` & operates on the given ctx namespace.                                                                                                        |
| `be_memosig_triple_`            | Returns an array of 3 context be_ functions. memosig object getter, value getter, & value setter                                                                      |
| `id_be_memosig_triple_`         | Same as `be_memosig_triple_` + sets the id of the `be` function                                                                                                       |
| `ns_id_be_memosig_triple_`      | Same as `be_memosig_triple_` + sets the id of the `be` function & operates on the given ctx namespace.                                                                |
| `ns_be_memosig_triple_`         | Same as `be_memosig_triple_` & operates on the given ctx namespace.                                                                                                   |
| `be_lock_memosig_triple_`       | Returns an array of 3 context be_ functions. lock_memosig object getter, value getter, & value setter                                                                 |
| `id_be_lock_memosig_triple_`    | Same as `be_lock_memosig_triple_` + sets the id of the `be` function                                                                                                  |
| `ns_id_be_lock_memosig_triple_` | Same as `be_lock_memosig_triple_` + sets the id of the `be` function & operates on the given ctx namespace.                                                           |
| `ns_be_lock_memosig_triple_`    | Same as `be_lock_memosig_triple_` & operates on the given ctx namespace.                                                                                              |
| `rmemo__wait`                   | Wait for rmemo to match given condition with a timeout                                                                                                                |
| `rmemo__off`                    | Turn off a rmemo & remove references to parent rmemos. Note that if the rmemo is weakly held by the parent rmemo using `WeakRef`.                                     |
| `rmemo__on`                     | Turn on a rmemo, readding the rmemo to be weakly held by parent rmemos.                                                                                               |
| `rmemo__unset`                  | Unset the rmemo. The rmemo be refreshed the next time the rmemo is called.                                                                                            |

## context

Contexts are useful for managing state & disposing of state with Garbage Collection. The current context can be filled with state. When it's time to dispose of the state, one can use Garbage Collection as long as all active references to the `ctx` are removed.

rememo includes functions to support contexts using ctx-core. ctx-core uses [dependency injection](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dependency_injection). The `ctx` is typically passed as an argument into the function being called. If the front-end library supports `Context` components, as React, Sveltejs, Solidjs, & others do, the `ctx` can be assigned to the `Context` component.

### context example

The above example works on the browser side, since there is only one instance `user_a$` & `admin_a$` to render the UI. The server can handle multiple requests concurrency. Defining module level rmemos is not concurrency safe. Concurrent requests will result in data from one request spilling over into another request.

A `ctx` solves this issue by storing the rmemo instances in the `ctx`. Each request instantiates a `ctx` via `ctx_()`.

ctx-core usese the `be_` function to define a memoized function to set a "slot" in the `ctx`.

[//]: @formatter:off
```ts
// users.ts
import { be_, type ctx_T, sig_ } from 'rmemo'
export const user_a$_ = be_(()=>
  sig_<User[]>([])
    .add(user_a$=>
      fetch('https://an.api/users')
        .then(res=>res.json())
        .then(user_a=>user_a$._ = user_a)))
export function user__add(ctx:ctx_T, user:User) {
  user_a$_(ctx)([...user_a$_(ctx)(), user])
}
export interface User {
  id:number
  name:string
}
```
[//]: @formatter:on

[//]: @formatter:off
```ts
// admins.ts
import { be_, memo_ } from 'rmemo'
import { user_a$_ } from './users.js'
export const admin_a$_ = be_(ctx=>
  memo_(()=>
    user_a$_(ctx)()
      .filter(i=>i.isAdmin)))
```
[//]: @formatter:on

### context with helper functions example

Calling `user_a$_(ctx)()` & `admin_a$_(ctx)()` is a bit awkward. rmemo provides some helper functions.

[//]: @formatter:off
```ts
// users.ts
import { be_sig_triple_, type ctx_T } from 'rmemo'
export const [
  user_a$_,
  user_a_
  user_a__set,
] = be_sig_triple_<User[]>(
  ()=>[]
).add((ctx, user_a$)=>
  fetch('https://an.api/users')
    .then(res=>res.json())
    .then(user_a=>user_a$._ = user_a))
export function user__add(ctx:ctx_T, user:User) {
  user_a__set(ctx, [...user_a_(ctx), user])
}
export interface User {
  id:number
  name:string
}
```
[//]: @formatter:on

[//]: @formatter:off
```ts
// admins.ts
import { be_memo_pair_ } from 'rmemo'
import { type User, user_a_ } from './users.js'
// uses the function argument to instantiate a rmemo
export const [
  admin_a$_,
  admin_a_,
] = be_memo_pair_(ctx=>
  user_a_(ctx)
    .filter(i=>i.isAdmin))
```
[//]: @formatter:on

## Note about the Tag Vector Name Convention

You may have noticed that underscore casing is used & the trailing `_` for factory functions. This is from the development of the [Tag Vector](https://www.briantakita.me/posts/tag-vector-0-introduction) name convention.

## motivation

I'm a fan of reactive state management solutions provided by nanostores, solidjs, svelte, & vanJS. I wanted one of these solutions to be a general solution that I can use on the browser & server, with web UIs & domain libraries. Each of these projects are focused on their particular objectives. I found they were unable to support my use cases in one way or another.

Between an impasse in adding autosubscriptions to nanostores & adding server-side reactive support to vanJS, I created rmemo.
